A *program* is anything that gets ran by our CPU (Central Processing Unit). Any time we add two numbers together, get input from the user, or save data into memory we are providing *instructions* for the CPU to follow through. Of course, CPUs (and consequently computers) don't understand human language so they receive these instructions via *machine code*. Unfortunately, machine code is virtually incomprehensible to us mere mortals, we have to use zeros and ones to get even a vague understanding of what it means, but it is incredibly efficient for computers.

Most initial programs until the 70s were manually written in machine code, which made creating them a long, tedious process. To make their lives easier, programmers created programming languages that converted human readable code to machine code (compiling). The first ones, called *assembly languages*, closely resembled machine code. However, more powerful languages like FORTRAN quickly sprung up with features that programmers today still rely on to make their lives easier.

## In comes Haxe
There are now thousands of programming languages in existence, some you may have heard of like JavaScript, common in websites; Python, popular with Data Science and AI; C/C++, common wherever high performance is required; and PHP... popular for security vulnerabilites (oops). Each has their own strong points, so good developers will use the right tool for the job.

Haxe is unique, instead of compiling straight to machine code like some of those languages, it compiles your code to other languages (called targets). This lets us write our programs in just one language, Haxe, then take advantage of special features from the different targets when needed. This is **perfect** for game development, in fact the creator of Haxe, Nicolas Cannasse, made it to write his own games. During development of your game, you can release web versions of your game for your friends to beta test, and when it is time to release on Steam you can compile down to C++ to maximize performance.